Add etcd to troubleshooting, datastore reference (#2805)
sensu/sensu-docs: content/sensu-go/6.1/operations/maintain-sensu/troubleshoot.md

    parent: maintain-sensu
---

> ## A word about etcd and disk latency

Author: @hillaryfraley I think the heading and TL;DR bits here are maybe a little off-brand for us. LMK your thoughts on how to frame this kind of advice?

Reviewer: @cwjohnston I think you might have removed this content altogether, is that right? I can't see it in the current commit for this PR.

The etcd default maximum database size is 2 GB.
If you suspect your etcd database has exceeded the maximum size, run this command to confirm cluster size:

{{< code shell >}}
# get current status with database size
etcdctl endpoint status
https://backend01:2379, 88db026f7feb72b4, 3.3.22, 2.1GB, false, 144, 18619245
https://backend02:2379, e98ad7a888d16bd6, 3.3.22, 2.1GB, true, 144, 18619245
https://backend03:2379, bc4e39432cbb36d, 3.3.22, 2.1GB, false, 144, 18619245
{{< /code >}}

To restore an etcd cluster with a database size that exceeds 2 GB, run these commands:

{{< code shell >}}
# get current revision number
etcdctl endpoint status --write-out="json" | egrep -o '"revision":[0-9]*' | egrep -o '[0-9].*'

# compact to revision, substitute revision obtained above for $rev
etcdctl compact $rev

# defrag to free space
etcdctl defrag

# confirm effective
etcdctl endpoint status
https://backend01:2379, 88db026f7feb72b4, 3.3.22, 1.0 MB, false, 144, 18619245
https://backend02:2379, e98ad7a888d16bd6, 3.3.22, 1.0 MB, true, 144, 18619245
https://backend03:2379, bc4e39432cbb36d, 3.3.22, 1.0 MB, false, 144, 18619245
{{< /code >}}

## Datastore performance

> 
> ### Overview

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> In a default deployment, Sensu uses [etcd datastore][17] for both configuration and state. As the number of checks and entities in your Sensu installation increases, so does the volume of read and write requests to etcd database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a default deployment, Sensu uses [etcd datastore][17] for both configuration and state.
As the number of checks and entities in your Sensu installation increases, so does the volume of read and write requests to etcd database.
```

> One trade-off in etcd's design is it's sensitivity to disk and CPU latency. When certain latency tollerances are regularly exceeded, failures will cascade. Sensu will attempt to recover from these conditions when it can, but 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One trade-off in etcd's design is its sensitivity to disk and CPU latency.
When certain latency tolerances are regularly exceeded, failures will cascade.
Sensu will attempt to recover from these conditions when it can, but 
```

Reviewer: Something is missing here after the "but"

To maximize Sensu Go performance, we recommend that you:

>  * Follow our [recommended backend hardware requirements][17].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 * Follow our [recommended backend hardware configuration][17].
```

 * Immplement [documented etcd system tuning practices][14].
 * [Benchmark your etcd storage volume][15] to establish baseline IOPS for your system.

>  * [Scale event storage using Postgres][16], reducing the overall volume of etcd transactions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 * [Scale event storage using PostgreSQL][16] to reduce the overall volume of etcd transactions.
```

>  As your Sensu deployments grow, prevention against the issues associated with poor datastore performance relies on ongoing collection and review of [Sensu time-series performance metrics][18].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 As your Sensu deployments grow, preventing issues associated with poor datastore performance relies on ongoing collection and review of [Sensu time-series performance metrics][18].
```

### Symptoms of poor performance

At the default "warn" log level, you may see messages like these from your Sensu backend:

{{< code json >}}
{"component":"etcd","level":"warning","msg":"read-only range request \"key:\\\"/sensu.io/handlers/default/keepalive\\\" limit:1 \" with result \"range_response_count:0 size:6\" took too long (169.767546ms) to execute","pkg":"etcdserver","time":"..."}
{{< /code >}}

> The above message indicates that a database query ("read-only range request") exceeded a 100 millisecond threshold hard-coded into etcd. Messages like these are helpful in so far as they can alert us to a trend, but occasional warnings of this nature aren't necessarily indicative of a problem.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The above message indicates that a database query ("read-only range request") exceeded a 100-millisecond threshold hard-coded into etcd.
Messages like these are helpful because they can alert you to a trend, but these occasional warnings don't necessarily indicate a problem.
```

> However, a trend of increasingly long-running database transactions will eventually lead to decreased reliability. You may experience symptoms of these conditions as inconsistent behavior around check execution or updates to configuration fail to be applied as expected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, a trend of increasingly long-running database transactions will eventually lead to decreased reliability.
You may experience symptoms of these conditions as inconsistent check execution behavior or configuration updates that are not applied as expected.
```

> As the etcd project's [tuning documentation][14] states, etcd is "very sensitive to disk latencies. Since etcd must persist proposals to its log, disk activity from other processes may cause long fsync latencies. [...] etcd may miss heartbeats, causing request timeouts and temporary leader loss."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As the [etcd tuning documentation][14] states:

> An etcd cluster is very sensitive to disk latencies. Since etcd must persist proposals to its log, disk activity from other processes may cause long fsync latencies. [...] etcd may miss heartbeats, causing request timeouts and temporary leader loss.
```

> When Sensu's etcd component doesn't recieve sufficient CPU cycles, or when it's file system can't sustain a sufficient number of IOPS, transactions will begin to timeout, leading to cascading failures:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When Sensu's etcd component doesn't recieve sufficient CPU cycles or its file system can't sustain a sufficient number of IOPS, transactions will begin to timeout, leading to cascading failures.
```

> A message like this one indicates that syncing the etcd database to disk exceeded another threshold:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A message like this indicates that syncing the etcd database to disk exceeded another threshold:
```

{{< code json >}}
{"component":"etcd","level":"warning","msg":"sync duration of 1.031759056s, expected less than 1s","pkg":"wal","time":"..."}
{{< /code >}}

> These subsequent "retrying of unary invoker failed" messages are indicative of failing requests to etcd:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These subsequent "retrying of unary invoker failed" messages indicate failing requests to etcd:
```

{{< code json >}}
{"level":"warn","ts":"...","caller":"clientv3/retry_interceptor.go:62","msg":"retrying of unary invoker failed","target":"endpoint://client-6f6bfc7e-cf31-4498-a564-78d6b7b3a44e/localhost:2379","attempt":0,"error":"rpc error: code = Canceled desc = context canceled"}
message repeated 5 times
{{< /code >}}

> In many cases the backend service detects and attempts to recover from errors like these, so you may see a message like this one:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In many cases, the backend service detects and attempts to recover from errors like these, so you may see a message like this:
```

{{< code json >}}
{"component":"backend","error":"error from keepalived: internal error: etcdserver: request timed out","level":"error","msg":"backend stopped working and is restarting","time":"..."}
{{< /code >}}

> In some scenarios this may result in a crash loop that is difficult to recover from. You may observe that the Sensu backend process continues running, but is not listening for connections on the agent websocket, API or web UI ports. The backend will stop listening on those ports when the etcd database is unavailable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This may result in a crash loop that is difficult to recover from.
You may observe that the Sensu backend process continues running but is not listening for connections on the agent websocket, API, or web UI ports.
The backend will stop listening on those ports when the etcd database is unavailable.
```

https://backend03:2379, bc4e39432cbb36d, 3.3.22, 2.1GB, false, 144, 18619245
{{< /code >}}

To restore an etcd cluster with a database size that exceeds 2 GB, run these commands:

{{< code shell >}}
# get current revision number
etcdctl endpoint status --write-out="json" | egrep -o '"revision":[0-9]*' | egrep -o '[0-9].*'

# compact to revision, substitute revision obtained above for $rev
etcdctl compact $rev

# defrag to free space
etcdctl defrag

# confirm effective
etcdctl endpoint status
https://backend01:2379, 88db026f7feb72b4, 3.3.22, 1.0 MB, false, 144, 18619245
https://backend02:2379, e98ad7a888d16bd6, 3.3.22, 1.0 MB, true, 144, 18619245
https://backend03:2379, bc4e39432cbb36d, 3.3.22, 1.0 MB, false, 144, 18619245
{{< /code >}}

## Datastore performance

In a default deployment, Sensu uses [etcd datastore][17] for both configuration and state.
As the number of checks and entities in your Sensu installation increases, so does the volume of read and write requests to etcd database.

One trade-off in etcd's design is its sensitivity to disk and CPU latency.
When certain latency tolerances are regularly exceeded, failures will cascade.

> Sensu will attempt to recover from these conditions when it can, but 

Author: @cwjohnston fix this orphaned clause

> Sensu will attempt to recover from these conditions when it can, but 

Author: ```suggestion
Sensu will attempt to recover from these conditions when it can, but this may not be successful.
```

However, a trend of increasingly long-running database transactions will eventually lead to decreased reliability.
You may experience symptoms of these conditions as inconsistent check execution behavior or configuration updates that are not applied as expected.

As the [etcd tuning documentation][14] states:

> An etcd cluster is very sensitive to disk latencies. Since etcd must persist proposals to its log, disk activity from other processes may cause long fsync latencies. [...] etcd may miss heartbeats, causing request timeouts and temporary leader loss.

When Sensu's etcd component doesn't recieve sufficient CPU cycles or its file system can't sustain a sufficient number of IOPS, transactions will begin to timeout, leading to cascading failures.

A message like this indicates that syncing the etcd database to disk exceeded another threshold:

{{< code json >}}
{"component":"etcd","level":"warning","msg":"sync duration of 1.031759056s, expected less than 1s","pkg":"wal","time":"..."}
{{< /code >}}

These subsequent "retrying of unary invoker failed" messages indicate failing requests to etcd:

> {{< code json >}}
> {"level":"warn","ts":"...","caller":"clientv3/retry_interceptor.go:62","msg":"retrying of unary invoker failed","target":"endpoint://client-6f6bfc7e-cf31-4498-a564-78d6b7b3a44e/localhost:2379","attempt":0,"error":"rpc error: code = Canceled desc = context canceled"}
> message repeated 5 times
> {{< /code >}}
> 

Author: ```suggestion
{{< code json >}}
{"level":"warn","ts":"...","caller":"clientv3/retry_interceptor.go:62","msg":"retrying of unary invoker failed","target":"endpoint://client-6f6bfc7e-cf31-4498-a564-78d6b7b3a44e/localhost:2379","attempt":0,"error":"rpc error: code = Canceled desc = context canceled"}
{{< /code >}}

On busy systems you may also see output like "message repeated 5 times" indicating that failing requests were retried multiple times.
```

> In many cases, the backend service detects and attempts to recover from errors like these, so you may see a message like this:

Author: ```suggestion

In many cases, the backend service detects and attempts to recover from errors like these, so you may see a message like this:
```

To resolve this problem, install the [`lsb_release` package][8] for your Linux distribution.

## Investigate etcd cluster status

Some issues require you to investigate the state of the etcd cluster or data stored within etcd.
In these cases, we suggest using the `etcdctl` tool to query and manage the etcd database.

Sensu's supported packages do not include the `etcdctl` executable, so you must get it from a compatible etcd release.

### Configure etcdctl environment variables

To use etcdctl to investigate etcd cluster and data storage issues, first run these commands to configure etcdctl environment variables:

{{< code shell >}}
export ETCDCTL_API=3
export ETCDCTL_CACERT=/etc/sensu/ca.pem
# skip ETCDCTL_CERT and ETCDCTL_KEY, unless your etcd uses client certificate authentication
# export ETCDCTL_CERT=/etc/sensu/cert.pem
# export ETCDCTL_KEY=/etc/sensu/key.pem
export ETCDCTL_ENDPOINTS="https://backend01:2379,https://backend02:2379,https://backend03:2379"
{{< /code >}}

### View cluster status and alarms

> Use the commands listed here to retrieve etcd cluster status or list alarms.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the commands listed here to retrieve etcd cluster status and list and clear alarms.
```

{{< code shell >}}
# get status
etcdctl endpoint status
# list alarms
etcdctl alarm list
# clear alarms
etcdctl alarm dearm
{{< /code >}}

### Restore a cluster with an oversized database 

The etcd default maximum database size is 2 GB.

> If you suspect your etcd database has exceeded the maximum size, run this command to confirm cluster size:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you suspect your etcd database exceeds the maximum size, run this command to confirm cluster size:
```

To resolve this problem, install the [`lsb_release` package][8] for your Linux distribution.

## Investigate etcd cluster status

> Some issues require investigating the state of the etcd cluster or data stored within etcd. In many such cases, this best accomplished by using the `etcdctl` tool to query and manage the etcd database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some issues require you to investigate the state of the etcd cluster or data stored within etcd.
In these cases, we suggest using the `etcdctl` tool to query and manage the etcd database.

Sensu's supported packages do not include the `etcdctl` executable, so you must get it from a compatible etcd release.
```

> ### Obtaining etcdctl
> 
> Sensu official packages do not include the etcdctl executable. so you'll need to obtain it from a compatible etcd release.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

### Configure etcdctl environment variables

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

To use etcdctl to investigate etcd cluster and data storage issues, first run these commands to configure etcdctl environment variables:

```

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{< code shell >}}
```

export ETCDCTL_API=3
export ETCDCTL_CACERT=/etc/sensu/ca.pem

> export ETCDCTL_CERT=/rpool/data/subvol-112-disk-0/etc/sensu/etcd-client.crt
> export ETCDCTL_KEY=/rpool/data/subvol-112-disk-0/etc/sensu/etcd-client.key

Author: ```suggestion
# skip ETCDCTL_CERT and ETCDCTL_KEY, unless your etcd uses client certificate authentication
# export ETCDCTL_CERT=/etc/sensu/cert.pem
# export ETCDCTL_KEY=/etc/sensu/key.pem
```

export ETCDCTL_ENDPOINTS="https://backend01:2379,https://backend02:2379,https://backend03:2379"

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{< /code >}}
```

> ### See some stuff

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### View cluster status and alarms
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Use the commands listed here to retrieve etcd cluster status or list alarms.
```

```
# get status
etcdctl --endpoints https://etcd.example.com:2379 endpoint status
# list alarms
etcdctl --endpoints https://etcd.example.com:2379 alarm list

> # clear alarms

Reviewer: ```suggestion

### Clear etcd alarms

To clear etcd alarms:

{{< code shell >}}
# clear alarms
```

Author: I am in favor keeping this as-is, it feels a little disjoined to have the "clear alarms" one-line command in its own section.

> etcdctl --endpoints https://etcd.example.com:2379 alarm dearm

Reviewer: Another possibility is to have a section `### View etcd cluster status` and then separate the alarms stuff `### List and clear etcd alarms`

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{< /code >}}
```

> ### Restore cluster with oversized database 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Restore a cluster with an oversized database 
```

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The etcd default maximum database size is 2 GB.
If you suspect your etcd database has exceeded the maximum size, run this command to confirm cluster size:

```

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{< code shell >}}
```

> # get current status; note etcd default max database size is 2gb

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# get current status with database size
```

etcdctl endpoint status
https://backend01:2379, 88db026f7feb72b4, 3.3.22, 2.1GB, false, 144, 18619245
https://backend02:2379, e98ad7a888d16bd6, 3.3.22, 2.1GB, true, 144, 18619245
https://backend03:2379, bc4e39432cbb36d, 3.3.22, 2.1GB, false, 144, 18619245

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{< /code >}}

To restore an etcd cluster with a database size that exceeds 2 GB, run these commands:

{{< code shell >}}
```

# get current revision number
etcdctl endpoint status --write-out="json" | egrep -o '"revision":[0-9]*' | egrep -o '[0-9].*'

# compact to revision, substitute revision obtained above for $rev
etcdctl compact $rev

# defrag to free space
etcdctl defrag

# confirm effective
etcdctl endpoint status
https://backend01:2379, 88db026f7feb72b4, 3.3.22, 1.0 MB, false, 144, 18619245
https://backend02:2379, e98ad7a888d16bd6, 3.3.22, 1.0 MB, true, 144, 18619245
https://backend03:2379, bc4e39432cbb36d, 3.3.22, 1.0 MB, false, 144, 18619245

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{< /code >}}
```

To resolve this problem, install the [`lsb_release` package][8] for your Linux distribution.

## Investigate etcd cluster status

Some issues require you to investigate the state of the etcd cluster or data stored within etcd.
In these cases, we suggest using the `etcdctl` tool to query and manage the etcd database.

Sensu's supported packages do not include the `etcdctl` executable, so you must get it from a compatible etcd release.

### Configure etcdctl environment variables

To use etcdctl to investigate etcd cluster and data storage issues, first run these commands to configure etcdctl environment variables:

{{< code shell >}}
export ETCDCTL_API=3
export ETCDCTL_CACERT=/etc/sensu/ca.pem
export ETCDCTL_CERT=/rpool/data/subvol-112-disk-0/etc/sensu/etcd-client.crt
export ETCDCTL_KEY=/rpool/data/subvol-112-disk-0/etc/sensu/etcd-client.key
export ETCDCTL_ENDPOINTS="https://backend01:2379,https://backend02:2379,https://backend03:2379"
{{< /code >}}

### View cluster status and alarms

```
# get status

> etcdctl --endpoints https://etcd.example.com:2379 endpoint status

Author: ```suggestion
etcdctl endpoint status
```

# list alarms

> etcdctl --endpoints https://etcd.example.com:2379 alarm list

Author: ```suggestion
etcdctl alarm list
```

# clear alarms

> etcdctl --endpoints https://etcd.example.com:2379 alarm dearm

Author: ```suggestion
etcdctl alarm dearm
```
